---
layout: post
tagline: Notes taken on intro to ruby
---
{% include JB/setup %}

Reference: <http://tryruby.org/>

## Interactive prompt
To open an interactive prompt on Mac OS X type: `irb`

## Some simple functions
`"Jimmy".reverse` to reverse a string  
`"Jimmy".length` to get the length of a string  
`"Jimmy" * 5`  

## Conversions
`40.to_s.reverse`. You can't reverse a number, but you can if you convert to a string first. Reverse is not defined for numbers. It is defined for arrays.

* `to_s` converts to strings
* `to_i` converts to integers
* `to_a` converts to arrays (or lists)

## Lists
`[12,47,35]­.max` to get the maximum number in a list of integers  
`[12,47,35].sort` to sort them  
`ticket = [12,47,35]` will assign the list to a variable called `ticket`  
`ticket.sort` will output the list sorted, but the value of `ticket` remains unchanged  
`ticket.sort!` will sort the list and reassign it to `ticket`  

## Strings
`poem["am"] = "was"` will replace all instances of `am` with `was` in the string variable `poem`
`poem.lines.to_a.reverse.join` will break a multi-line string into lines, add them to an array, reverse the array, then join the elements of the array back together to once again make a string. `to_s` instead of `join` would also have worked.

Methods can sometimes use `!` exclamation marks, and sometimes `?` question marks.

## Hashes
Hashes or dictionaries are created using {} e.g. `books = {}`.  
This is actually short for `Hash.new`.  
`books.keys` will return a list of all the keys in the hash.

## Symbols
Instead of using the same words over and over, create a symbol using `:` e.g. `:success`.

## Blocks
Blocks can be defined starting with an `{` and ending with `}`.   
e.g. `books.values.each { |rate| ratings[rate] += 1 }`.  

Blocks can alternatively be started with `do` and finished with `end`.

## Files and directories
`Dir.entries "/"` gives an array of strings containing the names of all the directories or files in the root directory.  
`Dir["/*.txt"]` will just list the text files in the root directory. This uses the [] method, similar to entries, but which searches for files using wildcard characters.  
`File.read(­"/comics.t­xt")` will read the contents of the file.  
Use `FileUtils.­cp('/comic­s.txt', '/Hom­e/comics.t­xt')` to copy files.  
Open a file in append mode using add some lines:

	File.open(­"/Home/com­ics.txt", "a") do |f|
	f << "cat and girl"­  
	end  

## Date and time
`File.mtime("/Home/comics.txt")` to find the last modified time of a file.  
`Time.now.hour` to give just the hour.  
`Time.now - 2.weeks` will give you the date 2 weeks ago.  

## Methods
Start with `def`, finish with `end`, indent if you like.

	def load_comics( path )
	  comics = {}
	  File.foreach(path) do |line|
	    name, url = line.split(': ')
	    comics[name] = url.strip
	  end
	  comics
	end
	
`File.foreach` is a method which opens a file and hands each line to the block.  
`require 'popu­p'` if you need to import a library called `popup`. It will be loaded into the Libraries folder.	

## Classes
Simple class definition:

	class BlogE­ntry
	  attr_acces­sor :titl­e, :time­, :full­text, :mood­
	end

Add a constructor:

	class BlogEntry
	  def initialize( title, mood, fulltext )
	    @time = Time.now
	    @title, @mood, @fulltext = title, mood, fulltext
	  end
	end

Accessors can be used outside the object using normal dot notation e.g. `entry.title`.  
When inside the object prepend the `@` symbol. e.g. `@title`.

## More on lists
`sort_by` can be used on a list of objects to sort them:  
e.g. `blog.sort_­by { |entr­y| entry­.time }`  
e.g. `blog.sort_­by { |entr­y| entry­.time }.reverse`  
`map` can be used to replace certain elements in a list
e.g. `blog.map {"Bruce Willis"}` will replace each BlogEntry object in the list with a string



